Openclaw powered by lemonade server (#220)
amd/playbooks: playbooks/supplemental/openclaw-lemonade-server/README.md

Together, they form a fully local AI agent stack: Lemonade handles model inference, and OpenClaw provides the agent loop that turns model outputs into real actions.

> **Before you continue:** OpenClaw is a highly autonomous AI agent. Giving any AI agent access to your system may result in unpredictable or unintended outcomes. Proceed only if you understand the risks and are comfortable with autonomous software acting on your behalf.

---

## What You'll Learn

By the end of this playbook you will be able to:

- Learn about **Lemonade Server**
- **Install OpenClaw** and **point it at Lemonade Server** as its AI backend.
- **Start the OpenClaw gateway** and confirm your agent is ready to work.
- **Connect a Discord bot** to your agent so you can chat with it from any device.

---

## Prerequisites

<!-- @os:linux -->
- A PC running **Ubuntu 24.04+** or a compatible Debian-based Linux distribution with `apt-get`
- At least **12 GB of RAM** (32 GB+ recommended for larger models)

> - **~10–20 GB of free disk space** for model weights

Reviewer: short one important step. how to set the shared memory to 96/120 GB. 
These are different procedure in windows and linux.  
In linux: like $amd-ttm --set 120
In windows: use adrenalin sw.

Reviewer 2: this is correct. One note - amd-ttm is now integrated into amd-smi. Just as an fyi.

<!-- @os:end -->
<!-- @os:windows -->
- A PC running **Windows 10/11**
- Visual Studio Community Edition [2022](https://aka.ms/vs/17/release/vs_community.exe)
- At least **12 GB of RAM** (32 GB+ recommended for larger models)
- **~10–20 GB of free disk space** for model weights
<!-- @os:end -->

<!-- @require:lemonade -->

---

## Configuring Context Size

For agent workloads, a larger context window lets the model keep more of the task history, tool outputs, and reasoning steps in view at once. Set this once after the server is running:

```bash

> lemonade config set ctx_size=32768

Reviewer: recommend a larger ctx_size, since 32768 is too small and easy to meet shut down issue of  continuous converisation, recommend to set the value as 190000.

Author: Good point, changed to 190000

```json
{"data":[],"object":"list"}
```

The empty `data` array simply means no model weights have been downloaded yet, the server itself is running and ready.

> The `netsh portproxy` rule survives reboots but the WSL gateway IP can change after `wsl --shutdown`. If Lemonade becomes unreachable from WSL after a restart, get the updated gateway IP and update the proxy with this new IP.

---
<!-- @os:end -->

## Install and Configure OpenClaw

### Install OpenClaw
<!-- @os:windows -->
> Run the commands in this section inside your **WSL terminal**.
<!-- @os:end -->
```bash
curl -fsSL https://openclaw.ai/install.sh | bash -s -- --no-prompt --no-onboard
```

The `--no-onboard` flag skips the interactive setup wizard, you will configure the model backend manually in the next step, which gives you precise control over which model and server are used.

After installation, confirm `openclaw` is on your `PATH`:

```bash
export PATH="$HOME/.npm-global/bin:$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"
openclaw --version
```

To persist this across terminal sessions:

```bash
echo 'export PATH="$HOME/.npm-global/bin:$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.bashrc
```

### Configure OpenClaw to Use Lemonade

> Run OpenClaw's non-interactive onboarding, replacing `YOUR_MODEL_ID` with your Lemonade Model ID. Use the plain name (e.g., `Qwen3.5-9B-GGUF`) for catalog models, or the `user.` prefixed name (e.g., `user.Qwen3.5-9B-GGUF-Q4-K-M`) for custom imported ones:

Reviewer: better to use some larger & newer model as sample to show the advantage of halo chip. like Qwen3.6-35B-A3B 4 bits, or Gemma4-26B-it.

Author: Sure:  suggesting Qwen3.5-35B-A3B-GGUF[available in lemonade] & Qwen3.6-35B-A3B-UD-Q4_K_M[user downloaded]

> Run OpenClaw's non-interactive onboarding, replacing `YOUR_MODEL_ID` with your Lemonade Model ID. Use the plain name (e.g., `Qwen3.5-35B-A3B-GGUF`) for catalog models, or the `user.` prefixed name (e.g., `user.Qwen3.6-35B-A3B-UD-Q4_K_M`) for custom imported ones:

  --gateway-bind loopback \
  --skip-health \
  --accept-risk
```
<!-- @os:end -->

This command writes OpenClaw's configuration to `~/.openclaw/openclaw.json`.

### Start the OpenClaw Gateway

The gateway is the OpenClaw process that manages the agent loop and serves the dashboard:

```bash
openclaw gateway run --bind loopback --port 18789
```

To open the dashboard, run this in a second terminal while the gateway is still running:

```bash
openclaw dashboard
```

This prints the authenticated URL, open it in your browser. You should see the OpenClaw dashboard with your Lemonade model listed as the active backend. **Your agent is ready.**

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/openclaw_dashboard.png" width="500" height="300" />
</p>

**Congratulations — you've built a fully local AI agent stack from scratch.** 

---

## Optional: Connect a Discord Bot to your Openclaw. [Reference](https://docs.openclaw.ai/channels/discord#ask-your-agent-2)

### Chat with Your Agent via Discord

Once the gateway is running, you can reach your local agent through Discord by wiring up a bot. This lets you send commands from your mobile device to your laptop and trigger workloads from anywhere.

> #### Create a Discord application and bot

Reviewer: Discord section is a little too long. Recommend to make this chapter shorter. since it's not core function of OpenClaw and non binding with halo hardware.

Author: True but I feel this adds a strong use case to try out Openclaw as it highlights accessing hardware from any device

> # Run OpenClaw with Lemonade Server as the backend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<!--
Copyright Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
-->

# Run OpenClaw with Lemonade Server as the backend
```

> **Before you continue:** OpenClaw is a highly autonomous AI agent. Giving any AI agent access to your system may result in unpredictable or unintended outcomes. Proceed only if you understand the risks and are comfortable with autonomous software acting on your behalf.

---

## What You'll Learn

By the end of this playbook you will be able to:

- Learn about **Lemonade Server**
- **Install OpenClaw** and **point it at Lemonade Server** as its AI backend.
- **Start the OpenClaw gateway** and confirm your agent is ready to work.
- **Connect a Discord bot** to your agent so you can chat with it from any device.

---

## Prerequisites

<!-- @os:linux -->
- A PC running **Ubuntu 24.04+** or a compatible Debian-based Linux distribution with `apt-get`
- At least **12 GB of RAM** (32 GB+ recommended for larger models)
- **~10–20 GB of free disk space** for model weights
<!-- @os:end -->
<!-- @os:windows -->
- A PC running **Windows 10/11**
- Visual Studio Community Edition [2022](https://aka.ms/vs/17/release/vs_community.exe)
- At least **12 GB of RAM** (32 GB+ recommended for larger models)

> - You could increase the dedicated GPU memory using [Adrenaline software](https://www.amd.com/en/support/download/drivers.html) to try out larger models

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- You could increase the dedicated GPU memory using [AMD Software: Adrenalin Edition™](https://www.amd.com/en/support/download/drivers.html) to try out larger models
```

- At least **12 GB of RAM** (32 GB+ recommended for larger models)
- **~10–20 GB of free disk space** for model weights
<!-- @os:end -->

---

<!-- @device:stx,krk,rx7900xt,rx9070xt -->

## Install and Start Lemonade Server
<!-- @os:linux -->
### Install Lemonade via the PPA

```bash
sudo apt-get install -y software-properties-common
sudo add-apt-repository -y ppa:lemonade-team/bleeding-edge
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y lemonade-server
```

This installs two key binaries:

| Binary | Role |
|--------|------|
| `lemonade` | CLI for model management: list, pull, import, configure |
| `lemond` | Daemon that hosts the HTTP inference server |
<!-- @os:end -->

<!-- @os:windows -->
### Install Lemonade via the MSI

Download the latest installer from [lemonade-server.ai](https://github.com/lemonade-sdk/lemonade/releases/latest/download/lemonade.msi) and run the .msi file.

After installation:

- The lemonade CLI is added to your system PATH automatically
- Lemonade server is expected to run in the background automatically

<!-- @os:end -->
Confirm the install worked:

```bash
lemonade --version
```

> 

Reviewer 4: Make sure to use the "requires" tag instead of explicitly adding those instructions here

Author: I do have a "requires" tag under prerequisites for Halo, these manual instructions are for non Halo devices.

Reviewer 4: By `Halo` do you mean `STX Halo` or the `Halo Box`?

"Requires" tags are specifically made to provide instructions to `non-Halo Box` devices. If this is confusing, please take a look at the mock website and see what happens when you select each of those devices.

If I'm missing something here, let me know.

Author: I got the tag usage wrong, corrected it now. Please review the updated changes.

Author: @danielholanda can we resolve this comment?

  --gateway-bind loopback \
  --skip-health \
  --accept-risk
```
<!-- @os:end -->
<!-- @os:windows -->
```bash
WINDOWS_HOST=$(ip route show default | awk '{print $3}' | head -1)

openclaw onboard \
  --non-interactive \
  --mode local \
  --auth-choice custom-api-key \
  --custom-base-url "http://$WINDOWS_HOST:13305/api/v1" \
  --custom-model-id "YOUR_MODEL_ID" \
  --custom-provider-id "lemonade" \
  --custom-compatibility "openai" \
  --custom-api-key "lemonade" \
  --secret-input-mode plaintext \
  --gateway-port 18789 \
  --gateway-bind loopback \
  --skip-health \
  --accept-risk
```
<!-- @os:end -->

This command writes OpenClaw's configuration to `~/.openclaw/openclaw.json`.

### Start the OpenClaw Gateway

The gateway is the OpenClaw process that manages the agent loop and serves the dashboard:

```bash
openclaw gateway run --bind loopback --port 18789
```

To open the dashboard, run this in a second terminal while the gateway is still running:

```bash
openclaw dashboard
```

This prints the authenticated URL, open it in your browser. You should see the OpenClaw dashboard with your Lemonade model listed as the active backend. **Your agent is ready.**

<p align="center">

>   <img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fcadf4de-8421-4f14-a63a-2fa5cbb7c4ec" width="500" height="300" />

Reviewer 4: Move images to assets folder (see other playbooks for reference)

Author: Done

Right-click your server icon/ **Privacy Settings**/ toggle on **Direct Messages**. This allows the bot to DM you, which is required for the pairing step.

#### Set the bot token and enable Discord in OpenClaw

Your bot token is a secret, store it as an environment variable and reference it from config:

```bash
export DISCORD_BOT_TOKEN="YOUR_BOT_TOKEN"
openclaw config set channels.discord.token \
  --ref-provider default --ref-source env --ref-id DISCORD_BOT_TOKEN
openclaw config set channels.discord.enabled true --strict-json
```

Restart the gateway so it picks up the new channel config:

```bash
openclaw gateway run --bind loopback --port 18789
```

You should see `logged in to discord as <bot-id>` in the gateway output.

#### Configure Openclaw with the Server details

Open your Openclaw Dashboard and send this message in the chat window replacing `<user_id>` and `<server_id>` with the IDs collected earlier

```bash
I already set my Discord bot token in config. Please finish Discord setup with User ID <user_id> and Server ID <server_id>.
```

#### Pair your Discord account

DM the bot in Discord. It will reply with a short pairing code.

<p align="center">

>   <img width="500" height="300" alt="Screenshot from 2026-04-19 22-51-27" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bbe5f4aa-d6c0-4958-9578-f2fd38cc97ef" />

Reviewer 4: Move images to assets folder (see other playbooks for reference)

Author: Done

</p>

Approve it on the machine running OpenClaw Dashboard
```bash
openclaw pairing approve <CODE>
```

> Pairing codes expire after one hour.

You can now chat with your agent directly from Discord and offload tasks to your local hardware.

<p align="center">

>   <img width="350" height="300" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7d0f9632-5a1d-4f3c-81a2-d1903939f5fd" />

Reviewer 4: Move images to assets folder (see other playbooks for reference)

Author: Done
